# Database


<!-- WARNING: THIS FILE WAS AUTOGENERATED! DO NOT EDIT! -->

I absolutely love [SQLAlchemy](link%20here). Data Modeling is one of the
concepts that initially drew me to coding. But I hate creating the
engine and and all the different options they give you for establishing
a connection. And how easy it is to screw it up. Especially because 90%
of the time I just want to preview a result in a DataFrame.

I wanted a simple wrapper class that handled instantiation and the
context managers required for connecting to the engine. While we’re at
it we can make it look nice, too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<a
href="https://github.com/schlinkertc/humble-chuck/blob/main/humble_chuck/database.py#L31"
target="_blank" style="float:right; font-size:smaller">source</a>

### DatabaseSettings

>      DatabaseSettings (_case_sensitive:bool|None=None,
>                        _nested_model_default_partial_update:bool|None=None,
>                        _env_prefix:str|None=None,
>                        _env_file:DotenvType|None=Path('.'),
>                        _env_file_encoding:str|None=None,
>                        _env_ignore_empty:bool|None=None,
>                        _env_nested_delimiter:str|None=None,
>                        _env_parse_none_str:str|None=None,
>                        _env_parse_enums:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_prog_name:str|None=None, _cli_parse_args:bool|list
>                        [str]|tuple[str,...]|None=None,
>                        _cli_settings_source:CliSettingsSource[Any]|None=None,
>                        _cli_parse_none_str:str|None=None,
>                        _cli_hide_none_type:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_avoid_json:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_enforce_required:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_use_class_docs_for_groups:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_exit_on_error:bool|None=None,
>                        _cli_prefix:str|None=None,
>                        _cli_implicit_flags:bool|None=None,
>                        _secrets_dir:PathType|None=None,
>                        username:Optional[str]=None,
>                        password:Optional[pydantic.types.SecretStr]=None,
>                        drivername:str, host:Optional[str]=None,
>                        port:Optional[int]=None, database:Optional[str]=None,
>                        query:dict[str,str]={})

\*Base class for settings, allowing values to be overridden by
environment variables.

This is useful in production for secrets you do not wish to save in
code, it plays nicely with docker(-compose), Heroku and any 12 factor
app design.

All the below attributes can be set via `model_config`.

Args: \_case_sensitive: Whether environment variables names should be
read with case-sensitivity. Defaults to `None`.
\_nested_model_default_partial_update: Whether to allow partial updates
on nested model default object fields. Defaults to `False`.
\_env_prefix: Prefix for all environment variables. Defaults to `None`.
\_env_file: The env file(s) to load settings values from. Defaults to
`Path('')`, which means that the value from `model_config['env_file']`
should be used. You can also pass `None` to indicate that environment
variables should not be loaded from an env file. \_env_file_encoding:
The env file encoding, e.g. `'latin-1'`. Defaults to `None`.
\_env_ignore_empty: Ignore environment variables where the value is an
empty string. Default to `False`. \_env_nested_delimiter: The nested env
values delimiter. Defaults to `None`. \_env_parse_none_str: The env
string value that should be parsed (e.g. “null”, “void”, “None”, etc.)
into `None` type(None). Defaults to `None` type(None), which means no
parsing should occur. \_env_parse_enums: Parse enum field names to
values. Defaults to `None.`, which means no parsing should occur.
\_cli_prog_name: The CLI program name to display in help text. Defaults
to `None` if \_cli_parse_args is `None`. Otherwse, defaults to
sys.argv\[0\]. \_cli_parse_args: The list of CLI arguments to parse.
Defaults to None. If set to `True`, defaults to sys.argv\[1:\].
\_cli_settings_source: Override the default CLI settings source with a
user defined instance. Defaults to None. \_cli_parse_none_str: The CLI
string value that should be parsed (e.g. “null”, “void”, “None”, etc.)
into `None` type(None). Defaults to \_env_parse_none_str value if set.
Otherwise, defaults to “null” if \_cli_avoid_json is `False`, and “None”
if \_cli_avoid_json is `True`. \_cli_hide_none_type: Hide `None` values
in CLI help text. Defaults to `False`. \_cli_avoid_json: Avoid complex
JSON objects in CLI help text. Defaults to `False`.
\_cli_enforce_required: Enforce required fields at the CLI. Defaults to
`False`. \_cli_use_class_docs_for_groups: Use class docstrings in CLI
group help text instead of field descriptions. Defaults to `False`.
\_cli_exit_on_error: Determines whether or not the internal parser exits
with error info when an error occurs. Defaults to `True`. \_cli_prefix:
The root parser command line arguments prefix. Defaults to ““.
\_cli_implicit_flags: Whether `bool` fields should be implicitly
converted into CLI boolean flags. (e.g. –flag, –no-flag). Defaults to
`False`. \_secrets_dir: The secret files directory or a sequence of
directories. Defaults to `None`.\*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<a
href="https://github.com/schlinkertc/humble-chuck/blob/main/humble_chuck/database.py#L41"
target="_blank" style="float:right; font-size:smaller">source</a>

### Database

>      Database (username:Optional[str]=None,
>                password:Optional[pydantic.types.SecretStr]=None,
>                drivername:str, host:Optional[str]=None,
>                port:Optional[int]=None, database:Optional[str]=None,
>                query:dict[str,str]={})

\*Create a Database connection with default functionality.

Inherits attributes from
[`DatabaseSettings`](https://schlinkertc.github.io/humble-chuck/database.html#databasesettings)
to manage credentials. Inherits methods from `AbstractDatabaseClass`.

Use the class as-is to quickly create a database connection, or create a
subclass to control connections to a specific database.

More on SQL Alchemy engines from [SQLAlchemy
docs](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/13/core/engines.html):

- The Engine is the starting point for any SQLAlchemy application. It’s
  “home base” for the actual database and its DBAPI.  
- An Engine references both a Dialect and a Pool, which together
  interpret the DBAPI’s module functions as well as the behavior of the
  database
- Pool object which will establish a DBAPI connection at localhost:5432
  when a connection request is first received  
  – Note that the Engine and its underlying Pool do **not** establish
  the first actual DBAPI connection until the Engine.connect() method is
  called, or an operation which is dependent on this method such as
  Engine.execute() is invoked.
- In this way, Engine and Pool can be said to have a lazy initialization
  behavior.  
- The Engine, once created, can either be used directly to interact with
  the database, or can be passed to a Session object to work with the
  ORM.\*

``` python
import os
```

``` python
class RNACentralDatabase(Database):
    model_config = SettingsConfigDict(env_prefix='rna_db_')
    
    drivername='postgresql'
    database='pfmegrnargs'
    host='hh-pgsql-public.ebi.ac.uk'
    port=5432
    

os.environ['rna_db_username']='reader'
os.environ['rna_db_password']='NWDMCE5xdipIjRrp'

rna_db = RNACentralDatabase()
rna_db
```

<table data-quarto-postprocess="true" data-border="1">
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">username</td>
<td>reader</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">password</td>
<td>**********</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">drivername</td>
<td>postgresql</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">host</td>
<td>hh-pgsql-public.ebi.ac.uk</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">port</td>
<td>5432</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">database</td>
<td>pfmegrnargs</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-quarto-table-cell-role="th">query</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
